**540 U.S. 668 (2004)**

# BANKS  
v.  
DRETKE, DIRECTOR, TEXAS DEPARTMENT OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE, CORRECTIONAL
INSTITUTIONS DIVISION.

No. 02-8286.

**Supreme Court of United States.**

Argued December 8, 2003. Decided February 24, 2004. CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED
STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE FIFTH CIRCUIT.

*669 *670 *671 *672 *673 *674 GINSBURG, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which REHNQUIST, C. J., and STEVENS, O'CONNOR, KENNEDY, SOUTER, and BREYER, JJ., joined, and in which SCALIA and THOMAS, JJ., joined as to Part III. THOMAS, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part, in which SCALIA, J., joined, _post,_ p. 706.

_George H. Kendall_ argued the cause for petitioner. With him on the briefs
were _Elaine R. Jones, Janai S. Nelson, Miriam Gohara,_ and _Clifton L.
Holmes._

_Gena Bunn,_ Assistant Attorney General of Texas, argued the cause for
respondent. With her on the brief were _Greg Abbott,_ Attorney General, _Barry
R. McBee,_ First Assistant Attorney General, _Jay Kimbrough,_ Deputy Attorney
General, and _Edward L. Marshall_ and _Katherine D. Hayes,_ Assistant
Attorneys General.[*]

JUSTICE [[author]]GINSBURG[[/author]] delivered the opinion of the Court.

Petitioner Delma Banks, Jr., was convicted of capital murder and sentenced to
death. Prior to trial, the State advised *675 Banks's attorney there would be
no need to litigate discovery issues, representing: "[W]e will, without the
necessity of motions[,] provide you with all discovery to which you are
entitled." App. 361, n. 1; App. to Pet. for Cert. A4 (both sources' internal
quotation marks omitted). Despite that undertaking, the State withheld
evidence that would have allowed Banks to discredit two essential prosecution
witnesses. The State did not disclose that one of those witnesses was a paid
police informant, nor did it disclose a pretrial transcript revealing that the
other witness' trial testimony had been intensively coached by prosecutors and
law enforcement officers.

Furthermore, the prosecution raised no red flag when the informant testified,
untruthfully, that he never gave the police any statement and, indeed, had not
talked to any police officer about the case until a few days before the trial.
Instead of correcting the informant's false statements, the prosecutor told
the jury that the witness "ha[d] been open and honest with you in every way,"
App. 140, and that his testimony was of the "utmost significance," _id.,_ at
146. Similarly, the prosecution allowed the other key witness to convey,
untruthfully, that his testimony was entirely unrehearsed. Through direct
appeal and state collateral review proceedings, the State continued to hold
secret the key witnesses' links to the police and allowed their false
statements to stand uncorrected.

Ultimately, through discovery and an evidentiary hearing authorized in a
federal habeas corpus proceeding, the long-suppressed evidence came to light.
The District Court granted Banks relief from the death penalty, but the Court
of Appeals reversed. In the latter court's judgment, Banks had documented his
claims of prosecutorial misconduct too late and in the wrong forum; therefore
he did not qualify for federal-court relief. We reverse that judgment. When
police or prosecutors conceal significant exculpatory or impeaching *676
material in the State's possession, it is ordinarily incumbent on the State to
set the record straight.

## I

On April 14, 1980, police found the corpse of 16-year-old Richard Whitehead in
Pocket Park, east of Nash, Texas, a town in the vicinity of Texarkana. _Id.,_
at 8, 141.[1] A preliminary autopsy revealed that Whitehead had been shot
three times. _Id.,_ at 10. Bowie County Deputy Sheriff Willie Huff, lead
investigator of the death, learned from two witnesses that Whitehead had been
in the company of petitioner, 21-year-old Delma Banks, Jr., late on the
evening of April 11. _Id.,_ at 11-15, 144; _Banks_ v. _State,_ 643 S.W.2d 129,
131 (Tex. Crim. App. 1982) (en banc), cert. denied, 464 U.S. 904 (1983). On
April 23, Huff received a call from a confidential informant reporting that
"Banks was coming to Dallas to meet an individual and get a weapon." App. 15.
That evening, Huff and other officers followed Banks to South Dallas, where
Banks visited a residence. _Ibid.;_ Brief for Petitioner 3. Police stopped
Banks's vehicle en route from Dallas, found a handgun in the car, and arrested
the car's occupants. App. 16. Returning to the Dallas residence Banks had
visited, Huff encountered and interviewed Charles Cook and recovered a second
gun, a weapon Cook said Banks had left with him several days earlier. _Ibid._
Tests later identified the second gun as the Whitehead murder weapon. _Id.,_
at 17.

In a May 21, 1980, pretrial hearing, Banks's counsel sought information from
Huff concerning the confidential informant who told Huff that Banks would be
driving to Dallas. _Id.,_ at 21. Huff was unresponsive. _Ibid._ Any
information that might reveal the identity of the informant, the prosecution
*677 urged, was privileged. _Id.,_ at 23. The trial court sustained the
State's objection. _Id.,_ at 24. Several weeks later, in a July 7, 1980,
letter, the prosecution advised Banks's counsel that "[the State] will,
without necessity of motions provide you with all discovery to which you are
entitled." _Id.,_ at 361, n. 1; App. to Pet. for Cert. A4 (both sources'
internal quotation marks omitted).

The guilt phase of Banks's trial spanned two days in September 1980. See Brief
for Petitioner 2; App. to Pet. for Cert. C3. Witnesses testified to seeing
Banks and Whitehead together on April 11 in Whitehead's green Mustang, and to
hearing gunshots in Pocket Park at 4 a.m. on April 12. _Banks_ v. _State,_ 643
S. W. 2d, at 131. Charles Cook testified that Banks arrived in Dallas in a
green Mustang at about 8:15 a.m. on April 12, and stayed with Cook until April
14. App. 42-43, 47-53. Cook gave the following account of Banks's visit. On
the morning of his arrival, Banks had blood on his leg and told Cook "he [had]
got into it on the highway with a white boy." _Id.,_ at 44. That night, Banks
confessed to having "kill[ed] the white boy for the hell of it and take[n] his
car and come to Dallas." _Id.,_ at 48. During their ensuing conversation, Cook
first noticed that "[Banks] had a pistol." _Id.,_ at 49. Two days later, Banks
left Dallas by bus. _Id.,_ at 52-53. The next day, Cook abandoned the Mustang
in West Dallas and sold Banks's gun to a neighbor. _Id.,_ at 54. Cook further
testified that, shortly before the police arrived at his residence to question
him, Banks had revisited him and requested the gun. _Id.,_ at 57.

On cross-examination, Cook three times represented that he had not talked to
anyone about his testimony. _Id.,_ at 59. In fact, however, Cook had at least
one "pretrial practice sessio[n]" at which Huff and prosecutors intensively
coached Cook for his appearance on the stand at Banks's trial. _Id.,_ at 325,
¶ 10, 381-390; Joint Lodging Material 1-36 (transcript of pretrial preparatory
session). The prosecution allowed Cook's misstatements to stand uncorrected.
In its guilt-phase *678 summation, the prosecution told the jury "Cook brought
you absolute truth." App. 84.

In addition to Cook, Robert Farr was a key witness for the prosecution.
Corroborating parts of Cook's account, Farr testified to traveling to Dallas
with Banks to retrieve Banks's gun. _Id.,_ at 34-35. On cross-examination,
defense counsel asked Farr whether he had "ever taken any money from some
police officers," or "give[n] any police officers a statement." _Id.,_ at
37-38. Farr answered no to both questions; he asserted emphatically that
police officers had not promised him anything and that he had "talked to no
one about this [case]" until a few days before trial. _Ibid._ These answers
were untrue, but the State did not correct them. Farr was the paid informant
who told Deputy Sheriff Huff that Banks would travel to Dallas in search of a
gun. _Id.,_ at 329; App. to Pet. for Cert. A4, A9. In a 1999 affidavit, Farr
explained:

> "I assumed that if I did not help [Huff] with his investigation of Delma
> that he would have me arrested for drug charges. That's why I agreed to help
> [Huff]. I was afraid that if I didn't help him, I would be arrested. . . .

> "Willie Huff asked me to help him find Delma's gun. I told [Huff] that he
> would have to pay me money right away for my help on the case. I think
> altogether he gave me about $200.00 for helping him. He paid me some of the
> money before I set Delma up. He paid me the rest after Delma was arrested
> and charged with murder. . . .

> "In order to help Willie Huff, I had to set Delma up. I told Delma that I
> wanted to rob a pharmacy to get drugs and that I needed his gun to do it. I
> did not really plan to commit a robbery but I told Delma this so that he
> would give me his gun. . . . I convinced Delma to drive to Dallas with me to
> get the gun." App. 442-443, ¶¶ 6-8.

*679 The defense presented no evidence. App. to Pet. for Cert. A6. Banks was convicted of murder committed in the course of a robbery, in violation of Tex. Penal Code Ann. § 19.03(a)(2) (1974). See App. to Pet. for Cert. C3.[2]

The penalty phase ran its course the next day. _Ibid._ Governed by the Texas
statutory capital murder scheme applicable in 1980, the jury decided Banks's
sentence by answering three "special issues." App. 142-143.[3] "If the jury
unanimously answer[ed] `yes' to each issue submitted, the trial court [would
be obliged to] sentence the defendant to death." _Penry_ v. _Lynaugh,_ 492
U.S. 302, 310 (1989) (construing Texas' sentencing scheme); Tex. Code Crim.
Proc. Ann., Arts. 37.071(c)-(e) (Vernon Supp. 1980). The critical question at
the penalty phase in Banks's case was: "Do you find from the evidence beyond a
reasonable doubt that there is a probability that the defendant, Delma Banks,
Jr., would commit criminal acts of violence that would constitute a continuing
threat to society?" App. 143 (internal quotation marks omitted).

On this question, the State offered two witnesses, Vetrano Jefferson and
Robert Farr. _Id.,_ at 104-113. Jefferson testified that, in early April 1980,
Banks had struck him across *680 the face with a gun and threatened to kill
him. _Id.,_ at 104-106. Farr's testimony focused once more on the trip to
Dallas to fetch Banks's gun. The gun was needed, Farr asserted, because "[w]e
[Farr and Banks] were going to pull some robberies." _Id.,_ at 108. According
to Farr, Banks "said he would take care of it" if "there was any trouble
during these burglaries." _Id.,_ at 109. When the prosecution asked: "How did
[Banks] say he would take care of it?" Farr responded: "[Banks] didn't go into
any specifics, but he said it would be taken care of." _Ibid._

On cross-examination, defense counsel twice asked whether Farr had told Deputy
Sheriff Huff of the Dallas trip. _Ibid._ The State remained silent as Farr
twice perjuriously testified: "No, I did not." _Ibid._ Banks's counsel also
inquired whether Farr had previously attempted to obtain prescription drugs by
fraud, and, "up tight over that," would "testify to anything anybody want[ed]
to hear." _Id.,_ at 110. Farr first responded: "Can you prove it?" _Ibid._
Instructed by the court to answer defense counsel's questions, Farr again
said: "No, I did not. . . ." _Ibid._

Two defense witnesses impeached Farr, but were, in turn, impeached themselves.
James Kelley testified to Farr's attempts to obtain drugs by fraud; the
prosecution impeached Kelley by eliciting his close relationship to Banks's
girl-friend. _Id.,_ at 124-129. Later, Kelley admitted to being drunk while on
the stand. App. to Pet. for Cert. A13. Former Arkansas police officer Gary
Owen testified that Farr, as a police informant in Arkansas, had given false
information; the prosecution impeached Owen by bringing out his pending
application for employment by defense counsel's private investigator. App.
129-131.

Banks's parents and acquaintances testified that Banks was a "respectful,
churchgoing young man." App. to Pet. for Cert. A7; App. 137-139. Thereafter,
Banks took the stand. He affirmed that he had "never before been convicted
*681 of a felony." _Id.,_ at 134.[4] Banks admitted striking Vetrano Jefferson
in April 1980, and traveling to Dallas to obtain a gun in late April 1980.
_Id.,_ at 134-136. He denied, however, any intent to participate in robberies,
asserting that Farr alone had planned to commit them. _Id.,_ at 136-137. The
prosecution suggested on cross-examination that Banks had been willing "to
supply [Farr] the means and possible death weapon in an armed robbery case."
_Id.,_ at 137. Banks conceded as much. _Ibid._

During summation, the prosecution intimated that Banks had not been wholly
truthful in this regard, suggesting that "a man doesn't travel two hundred
miles, or whatever the distance is from here [Texarkana] to Dallas, Texas, to
supply a person with a weapon." _Id.,_ at 143. The State homed in on Farr's
testimony that Banks said he would "take care" of any trouble arising during
the robbery:

> "[Farr] said, `Man, you know, what i[f] there's trouble?' And [Banks] says,
> `Don't worry about it. I'll take care of it.' I think that speaks for
> itself, and I think you know what that means. . . . I submit to you beyond a
> reasonable doubt that the State has again met its burden of proof, and that
> the answer to question number two [propensity to commit violent criminal
> acts] should also be yes." _Id.,_ at 140, 144. See also _id.,_ at 146-147.

Urging Farr's credibility, the prosecution called the jury's attention to
Farr's admission, at trial, that he used narcotics. _Id.,_ at 36, 140. Just as
Farr had been truthful about his drug use, the prosecution suggested, he was
also "open and honest with [the jury] in every way" in his penalty-phase
testimony. _Id.,_ at 140. Farr's testimony, the prosecution emphasized, was
"of the utmost significance" because it *682 showed "[Banks] is a danger to
friends and strangers, alike." _Id.,_ at 146. Banks's effort to impeach Farr
was ineffective, the prosecution further urged, because defense witness
"Kelley kn[ew] nothing about the murder," and defense witness Owen "wish[ed]
to please his future employers." _Id.,_ at 148.

The jury answered yes to the three special issues, and the judge sentenced
Banks to death. The Texas Court of Criminal Appeals denied Banks's direct
appeal. 643 S.W.2d, at 135. Banks's first two state postconviction motions
raised issues not implicated here; both were denied. _Ex parte Banks,_ No.
13568-01 (Tex. Crim. App. 1984); _Ex parte Banks,_ 769 S.W.2d 539, 540 (Tex.
Crim. App. 1989).

Banks's third state postconviction motion, filed January 13, 1992, presented
questions later advanced in federal court and reiterated in the petition now
before us. App. 150. Banks alleged "upon information and belief" that "the
prosecution knowingly failed to turn over exculpatory evidence as required by
[_Brady_ v. _Maryland,_ 373 U.S. 83 (1963)]";[5] the withheld evidence, Banks
asserted, "would have revealed Robert Farr as a police informant and Mr.
Banks' arrest as a set-up." App. 180, ¶ 114 (internal quotation marks
omitted). In support of this third state-court postconviction plea, Banks
attached an unsigned affidavit from his girlfriend, Farr's sister-in-law
Demetra Jefferson, which stated that Farr "was well-connected to law
enforcement people," and consequently managed to stay out of "trouble" for
illegally obtaining prescription drugs. _Id.,_ at 195, ¶ 7. Banks alleged as
well that during the guilt phase of his trial, the State deliberately withheld
information "critical to the jury's assessment of Cook's credibility,"
including the "generous *683 `deal' [Cook had] cut with the prosecutors."
_Id.,_ at 152, ¶ 2, 180, ¶ 114.[6]

The State's reply to Banks's pleading, filed October 6, 1992, "denie[d] each
and every allegation of fact made by [Banks], except those supported by
official court records and those specifically admitted." _Id.,_ at 234; Tr. of
Oral Arg. 32. "[N]othing was kept secret from the defense," the State
represented. App. 234. While the reply specifically asserted that the State
had made "no deal with Cook," _ibid.,_ the State said nothing specific about
Farr. Affidavits from Deputy Sheriff Huff and prosecutors accompanied the
reply. _Id.,_ at 241-243. The affiants denied any "deal, secret or otherwise,
with Charles Cook," but they, too, like the State's pleading they supported,
remained silent about Farr. _Ibid._

In February and July 1993 orders, the state postconviction court rejected
Banks's claims. App. to Pet. for Cert. E1-E9, G1-G7. The court found that
"there was no agreement between the State and the witness Charles Cook," but
made no findings concerning Farr. _Id.,_ at G2. In a January 10, 1996, one-
page _per curiam_ order, the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals upheld the lower
court's disposition of Banks's motion. _Id.,_ at D1.

On March 7, 1996, Banks filed the instant petition for a writ of habeas corpus
in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Texas. App.
248. He alleged multiple violations of his federal constitutional rights. App.
to Pet. for Cert. C5-C7. Relevant here, Banks reasserted that the State had
withheld material exculpatory evidence *684 "reveal[ing] Robert Farr as a
police informant and Mr. Banks' arrest as a set-up." App. 260, ¶ 152 (internal
quotation marks omitted). Banks also asserted that the State had concealed
"Cook's enormous incentive to testify in a manner favorable to the
[prosecution]." _Id.,_ at 260, ¶ 153; App. to Pet. for Cert. C6-C7.[7] In June
1998, Banks moved for discovery and an evidentiary hearing to gain information
from the State on the roles played and trial testimony provided by Farr and
Cook. App. 262-266, 282-283, 286. The superintending Magistrate Judge allowed
limited discovery regarding Cook, but found insufficient justification for
inquiries concerning Farr. _Id.,_ at 294-295.

Banks renewed his discovery and evidentiary hearing requests in February 1999.
_Id.,_ at 2, 300-331. This time, he proffered affidavits from both Farr and
Cook to back up his claims that, as to each of these two key witnesses, the
prosecution had wrongly withheld crucial exculpatory and impeaching evidence.
_Id.,_ at 322-331. Farr's affidavit affirmed that Farr had "set Delma up" by
proposing the drive to Dallas and informing Deputy Sheriff Huff of the trip.
_Id.,_ at 329, ¶ 8, 442-443, ¶ 8; _supra,_ at 678. Accounting for his
unavailability earlier, Farr stated that less than a year after the Banks
trial, he had left Texarkana, first for Oklahoma, then for California, because
his police-informant work endangered his life. App. 330-331, 444; Pet. for
Cert. 27, n. 12. Cook recalled that in preparation for his Banks trial
testimony, he had participated in "three or four . . . practice sessions" at
which prosecutors told him to testify "as they wanted [him] to, and that [he]
would spend the rest of [his] life in prison if [he] did not." App. 325, ¶¶
10-11.

On March 4, 1999, the Magistrate Judge issued an order establishing issues for
an evidentiary hearing, _id.,_ at 340, 346, at which she would consider
Banks's claims that the State had withheld "crucial exculpatory and impeaching
evidence" *685 concerning "two of the [S]tate's essential witnesses, Charles
Cook and Robert Farr." _Id.,_ at 340, 345 (internal quotation marks omitted).
In anticipation of the hearing, the Magistrate Judge ordered disclosure of the
Bowie County District Attorney's files. Brief for Petitioner 37-38; Tr. of
June 7-8, 1999, Federal Evidentiary Hearing (ED Tex.), p. 30 (hereinafter
Federal Evidentiary Hearing).

One item lodged in the District Attorney's files, turned over to Banks
pursuant to the Magistrate Judge's disclosure order, was a 74-page transcript
of a Cook interrogation. App. to Pet. for Cert. A10. The interrogation,
conducted by Bowie County law enforcement officials and prosecutors, occurred
in September 1980, shortly before the Banks trial. _Ibid._ The transcript
revealed that the State's representatives had closely rehearsed Cook's
testimony. In particular, the officials told Cook how to reconcile his
testimony with affidavits to which he had earlier subscribed recounting
Banks's visits to Dallas. See, _e. g.,_ Joint Lodging Material 24 ("Your
[April 1980] statement is obviously screwed up."); _id.,_ at 26 ("[T]he way
this statement should read is that. . . ."); _id.,_ at 32 ("[L]et me tell you
how this is going to work."); _id.,_ at 36 ("That's not in your [earlier]
statement."). Although the transcript did not bear on Banks's claim that the
prosecution had a deal with Cook, it provided compelling evidence that Cook's
testimony had been tutored by Banks's prosecutors. Without objection at the
hearing, the Magistrate Judge admitted the September 1980 transcript into
evidence. Brief for Petitioner 39; Federal Evidentiary Hearing 75-76.

Testifying at the evidentiary hearing, Deputy Sheriff Huff acknowledged, for
the first time, that Farr was an informant and that he had been paid $200 for
his involvement in the case. App. to Pet. for Cert. C43. As to Cook, a Banks
trial prosecutor testified, in line with the State's consistent position, that
no deal had been offered to gain Cook's trial testimony. _Id.,_ at C45;
Federal Evidentiary Hearing 52-53. *686 Defense counsel questioned the
prosecutor about the September 1980 transcript, calling attention to
discrepancies between the transcript and Cook's statements at trial. _Id.,_ at
65-68. In a posthearing brief and again in proposed findings of fact and
conclusions of law, Banks emphasized the suppression of the September 1980
transcript, noting the prosecution's obligation to disclose material,
exculpatory evidence, and the assurance in this case that Banks would receive
"all [the] discovery to which [Banks was] entitled." App. 360-361, and n. 1,
378-379 (internal quotation marks omitted); _supra,_ at 677.

In a May 11, 2000, report and recommendation, the Magistrate Judge recommended
a writ of habeas corpus with respect to Banks's death sentence, but not his
conviction. App. to Pet. for Cert. C54. "[T]he State's failure to disclose
Farr's informant status, coupled with trial counsel's dismal performance
during the punishment phase," the Magistrate Judge concluded, "undermined the
reliability of the jury's verdict regarding punishment." _Id.,_ at C44.
Finding no convincing evidence of a deal between the State and Cook, however,
she recommended that the guilt-phase verdict remain undisturbed. _Id.,_ at
C46.

Banks moved to alter or amend the Magistrate Judge's report on the ground that
it left unresolved a fully aired question, _i. e.,_ whether Banks's rights
were violated by the State's failure to disclose to the defense the
prosecution's eve-of-trial interrogation of Cook. App. 398. That
interrogation, Banks observed, could not be reconciled with Cook's insistence
at trial that he had talked to no one about his testimony. _Id.,_ at 400, n.
17; see _supra,_ at 677.

The District Court adopted the Magistrate Judge's report and denied Banks's
motion to amend the report. App. to Pet. for Cert. B6; App. 421-424.
Concerning the Cook _Brady_ transcript-suppression claim, the District Court
recognized that Banks had filed his federal petition in 1996, three years
before he became aware of the September 1980 *687 transcript. App. 422-423.
When the transcript surfaced in response to the Magistrate Judge's 1999
disclosure order, Banks raised that newly discovered, long withheld document
in his proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law and, again, in his
objections to the Magistrate Judge's report. _Id.,_ at 423. The District Court
concluded, however, that Banks had not properly pleaded a _Brady_ claim
predicated on the withheld Cook rehearsal transcript. App. 422. When that
_Brady_ claim came to light, the District Court reasoned, Banks should have
moved to amend or supplement his 1996 federal habeas petition specifically to
include the 1999 discovery as a basis for relief. App. 423. Banks urged that a
_Brady_ claim based on the September 1980 transcript had been aired by implied
consent; under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 15(b), he contended, the claim
should have been treated as if raised in the pleadings. App. 433.[8] Banks
sought, and the District Court denied, a certificate of appealability on this
question. _Id.,_ at 433, 436.

In an August 20, 2003, unpublished _per curiam_ opinion, the Court of Appeals
for the Fifth Circuit reversed the judgment of the District Court to the
extent that it granted relief on the Farr _Brady_ claim and denied a
certificate of appealability on the Cook _Brady_ claim. App. to Pet. for Cert.
A2, judgt. order reported at 48 Fed. Appx. 104 (2002).[9] The *688 Court of
Appeals observed that in his 1992 state-court postconviction application,
Banks had not endeavored to develop the facts underpinning the Farr _Brady_
claim. App to Pet. for Cert. A19-A20. For that reason, the court held, the
evidentiary proceeding ordered by the Magistrate Judge was unwarranted.
_Ibid._ The Court of Appeals expressed no doubt that the prosecution had
suppressed, prior to the federal habeas proceeding, Farr's informant status
and his part in the fateful trip to Dallas. But Banks was not appropriately
diligent in pursuing his state-court application, the Court of Appeals
maintained. In the Fifth Circuit's view, Banks should have at that time
attempted to locate Farr and question him; similarly, he should have asked to
interview Deputy Sheriff Huff and other officers involved in investigating the
crime. _Id.,_ at A19, A22. If such efforts had proved unavailing, the Court of
Appeals suggested, Banks might have applied to the state court for assistance.
_Id.,_ at A19. Banks's lack of diligence in pursuing his 1992 state-court
plea, the Court of Appeals concluded, rendered the evidence uncovered in the
federal habeas proceeding procedurally barred. _Id.,_ at A22-A23.

In any event, the Fifth Circuit further concluded, Farr's status as an
informant was not "materia[l]" for _Brady_ purposes. App. to Pet. for Cert.
A32-A33. Banks had impeached Farr at trial by bringing out that he had been a
police informant in Arkansas, and an unreliable one at that. _Id.,_ at A28,
A32-A33; _supra,_ at 680. Moreover, the Court of Appeals said, other witnesses
had corroborated much of Farr's testimony against Banks. App. to Pet. for
Cert. A32. Notably, Banks himself had acknowledged his willingness to get a
gun for Farr's use in robberies. _Ibid._ In addition, the Fifth Circuit
observed, the Magistrate Judge had relied on the cumulative effect of _Brady_
error and the ineffectiveness of Banks's counsel at the penalty phase. App. to
Pet. for Cert. A44. Banks himself, however, had not urged that position; he
had argued _Brady_ and ineffective assistance of *689 counsel discretely, not
cumulatively. App. to Pet. for Cert. A46-A47. Finally, in accord with the
District Court, the Court of Appeals apparently regarded Rule 15(b) as
inapplicable in habeas proceedings. App. to Pet. for Cert. A51-A52. The Fifth
Circuit accordingly denied a certificate of appealability on the Cook _Brady_
transcript-suppression claim. App. to Pet. for Cert. A52, A78.

With an execution date set for March 12, 2003, Banks applied to this Court for
a writ of certiorari, presenting four issues: the tenability of his Farr
_Brady_ claim; a penalty-phase ineffective-assistance-of-counsel claim; the
question whether, as to the Cook _Brady_ transcript-suppression claim, a
certificate of appealability was wrongly denied; and a claim of improper
exclusion of minority jurors in violation of _Swain_ v. _Alabama,_ 380 U.S.
202 (1965). Pet. for Cert. 23-24. We stayed Banks's execution on March 12,
2003, 538 U.S. 917, and, on April 21, 2003, granted his petition on all
questions other than his _Swain_ claim. 538 U.S. 977. We now reverse the Court
of Appeals' judgment dismissing Banks's Farr _Brady_ claim and that Court's
denial of a certificate of appealability on his Cook _Brady_ claim.[10]

## II

We note, initially, that Banks's _Brady_ claims arose under the regime in
place prior to the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996
(AEDPA), 110 Stat. 1214. Turning to the tenability of those claims, we
consider first Banks's Farr _Brady_ claim as it trains on his death sentence,
see App. to Pet. for Cert. B6 (District Court granted habeas solely with
respect to the capital sentence), and next, Banks's Cook _Brady_ claim.

##  *690 A

To pursue habeas corpus relief in federal court, Banks first had to exhaust
"the remedies available in the courts of the State." 28 U.S. C. § 2254(b)
(1994 ed.); see _Rose_ v. _Lundy,_ 455 U.S. 509, 520 (1982). Banks alleged in
his January 1992 state-court application for a writ of habeas corpus that the
prosecution knowingly failed to turn over exculpatory evidence involving Farr
in violation of Banks's due process rights. App. 180. Banks thus satisfied the
exhaustion requirement as to the legal ground for his Farr _Brady_ claim.[11]

In state postconviction court, however, Banks failed to produce evidence
establishing that Farr had served as a police informant in this case. As
support for his Farr _Brady_ claim, Banks appended to his state-court
application only Demetra Jefferson's hardly probative statement that Farr "was
well-connected to law enforcement people." App. 195, ¶ 7; see _supra,_ at 682.
In the federal habeas forum, therefore, it was incumbent on Banks to show that
he was not barred, by reason of the anterior state proceedings, from producing
evidence to substantiate his Farr _Brady_ claim. Banks "[would be] entitled to
an evidentiary hearing [in federal court] if he [could] show cause for his
failure to develop the *691 facts in state-court proceedings and actual
prejudice resulting from that failure." _Keeney_ v. _Tamayo-Reyes,_ 504 U.S.
1, 11 (1992).

_Brady,_ we reiterate, held that "the suppression by the prosecution of
evidence favorable to an accused upon request violates due process where the
evidence is material either to guilt or to punishment, irrespective of the
good faith or bad faith of the prosecution." 373 U.S., at 87. We set out in
_Strickler_ v. _Greene,_ 527 U.S. 263, 281-282 (1999), the three components or
essential elements of a _Brady_ prosecutorial misconduct claim: "The evidence
at issue must be favorable to the accused, either because it is exculpatory,
or because it is impeaching; that evidence must have been suppressed by the
State, either willfully or inadvertently; and prejudice must have ensued." 527
U.S., at 281-282. "[C]ause and prejudice" in this case "parallel two of the
three components of the alleged _Brady_ violation itself." _Id.,_ at 282.
Corresponding to the second _Brady_ component (evidence suppressed by the
State), a petitioner shows "cause" when the reason for his failure to develop
facts in state-court proceedings was the State's suppression of the relevant
evidence; coincident with the third _Brady_ component (prejudice), prejudice
within the compass of the "cause and prejudice" requirement exists when the
suppressed evidence is "material" for _Brady_ purposes. 527 U.S., at 282. As
to the first _Brady_ component (evidence favorable to the accused), beyond
genuine debate, the suppressed evidence relevant here, Farr's paid informant
status, qualifies as evidence advantageous to Banks. See App. to Pet. for
Cert. A26 (Court of Appeals' recognition that "Farr's being a paid informant
would certainly be favorable to Banks in attacking Farr's testimony"). Thus,
if Banks succeeds in demonstrating "cause and prejudice," he will at the same
time succeed in establishing the elements of his Farr _Brady_ death penalty
due process claim.

##  *692 B

Our determination as to "cause" for Banks's failure to develop the facts in
state-court proceedings is informed by _Strickler._[12] In that case, Virginia
prosecutors told the petitioner, prior to trial, that "the prosecutor's files
were open to the petitioner's counsel," thus "there was no need for a formal
_[Brady]_ motion." 527 U.S., at 276, n. 14 (quoting App. in _Strickler_ v.
_Greene,_ O. T. 1998, No. 98-5864, pp. 212-213 (brackets in original)). The
prosecution file given to the _Strickler_ petitioner, however, did not include
several documents prepared by an "importan[t]" prosecution witness, recounting
the witness' initial difficulty recalling the events to which she testified at
the petitioner's trial. 527 U.S., at 273-275, 290. Those absent-from-the-file
documents could have been used to impeach the witness. _Id.,_ at 273. In
state-court postconviction proceedings, the _Strickler_ petitioner had
unsuccessfully urged ineffective assistance of trial counsel based on
counsel's failure to move, pretrial, for _Brady_ material. Answering that
plea, the State asserted that a _Brady_ motion would have been superfluous,
for the prosecution had maintained an open file policy pursuant to which it
had disclosed all _Brady_ material. 527 U.S., at 276, n. 14, 278.

This Court determined that in the federal habeas proceedings, the _Strickler_
petitioner had shown cause for his failure to raise a _Brady_ claim in state
court. 527 U.S., at 289. Three factors accounted for that determination:

> "(a) the prosecution withheld exculpatory evidence; (b) petitioner
> reasonably relied on the prosecution's open file policy as fulfilling the
> prosecution's duty to disclose such evidence; and (c) the [State] confirmed
> petitioner's reliance on the open file policy by asserting during state *693
> habeas proceedings that petitioner had already received everything known to
> the government." _Ibid._ (internal quotation marks omitted).[13]

This case is congruent with _Strickler_ in all three respects. First, the
State knew of, but kept back, Farr's arrangement with Deputy Sheriff Huff.
App. to Pet. for Cert. C43; Tr. of Oral Arg. 33; cf. _Kyles_ v. _Whitley,_ 514
U.S. 419, 437 (1995) (prosecutors are responsible for "any favorable evidence
known to the others acting on the government's behalf in the case, including
the police"). Second, the State asserted, on the eve of trial, that it would
disclose all _Brady_ material. App. 361, n. 1; see _supra,_ at 677. As
_Strickler_ instructs, Banks cannot be faulted for relying on that
representation. See 527 U.S., at 283-284 (an "open file policy" is one factor
that "explain[s] why trial counsel did not advance [a _Brady_] claim").

Third, in his January 1992 state habeas application, Banks asserted that Farr
was a police informant and Banks's arrest, "a set-up." App. 180, ¶ 114
(internal quotation marks omitted). In its answer, the State denied Banks's
assertion. _Id.,_ at 234; see _supra,_ at 683. The State thereby "confirmed"
Banks's reliance on the prosecution's representation that it had fully
disclosed all relevant information its file contained. 527 U.S., at 289; see
_id.,_ at 284 (state habeas counsel, as well as trial counsel, could
reasonably rely on the State's representations). In short, because the State
persisted in hiding Farr's informant status and misleadingly represented that
it had complied in full with its _Brady_ disclosure obligations, Banks had
cause for failing to investigate, in state postconviction proceedings, Farr's
connections to Deputy Sheriff Huff.

*694 On the question of "cause," moreover, Banks's case is stronger than was the petitioner's in _Strickler_ in a notable respect. As a prosecution witness in the guilt and penalty phases of Banks's trial, Farr repeatedly misrepresented his dealings with police; each time Farr responded untruthfully, the prosecution allowed his testimony to stand uncorrected. See _supra,_ at 678-680. Farr denied taking money from or being promised anything by police officers, App. 37; he twice denied speaking with police officers, _id.,_ at 38, and twice denied informing Deputy Sheriff Huff about Banks's trip to Dallas, _id.,_ at 109. It has long been established that the prosecution's "deliberate deception of a court and jurors by the presentation of known false evidence is incompatible with rudimentary demands of justice." _Giglio_ v. _United States,_ 405 U.S. 150, 153 (1972) (quoting _Mooney_ v. _Holohan,_ 294 U.S. 103, 112 (1935) _(per curiam)_ (internal quotation marks omitted)). If it was reasonable for Banks to rely on the prosecution's full disclosure representation, it was also appropriate for Banks to assume that his prosecutors would not stoop to improper litigation conduct to advance prospects for gaining a conviction. See _Berger_ v. _United States,_ 295 U.S. 78, 88 (1935); _Strickler,_ 527 U. S., at 284.[14]

The State presents three main arguments for distinguishing _Strickler_ on the
issue of "cause," two of them endorsed *695 by the Court of Appeals. Brief for
Respondent 15-20; App. to Pet. for Cert. A19, A22-A23; see _supra,_ at
687-688. We conclude that none of these arguments accounts adequately for the
State's concealment and misrepresentation regarding Farr's link to Deputy
Sheriff Huff. The State first suggests that Banks's failure, during state
postconviction proceedings, to "attempt to locate Farr and ascertain his true
status," or to "interview the investigating officers, such as Deputy Huff, to
ascertain Farr's status," undermines a finding of cause; the Fifth Circuit
agreed. App. to Pet. for Cert. A22; Brief for Respondent 18-20. In the State's
view, "[t]he question [of cause] revolves around Banks's conduct,"
particularly his lack of appropriate diligence in pursuing the Farr _Brady_
claim before resorting to federal court. Brief for Respondent 14.[15]

We rejected a similar argument in _Strickler._ There, the State contended that
examination of a witness' trial testimony, alongside a letter the witness
published in a local newspaper, should have alerted the petitioner to the
existence of undisclosed interviews of the witness by the police. 527 U.S., at
284, and n. 26. We found this contention insubstantial. In light of the
State's open file policy, we noted, "it is especially unlikely that counsel
would have suspected that additional impeaching evidence was being withheld."
_Id.,_ at 285. Our decisions lend no support to the notion that defendants
must scavenge for hints of undisclosed _Brady_ material when the prosecution
represents that all such material has been disclosed. As we observed in
_Strickler,_ defense counsel has no "procedural obligation to assert
constitutional error on the basis of mere suspicion that some prosecutorial
*696 misstep may have occurred." 527 U.S., at 286-287. The "cause" inquiry, we
have also observed, turns on events or circumstances "external to the
defense." _Amadeo_ v. _Zant,_ 486 U.S. 214, 222 (1988) (quoting _Murray_ v.
_Carrier,_ 477 U.S. 478, 488 (1986)).

The State here nevertheless urges, in effect, that "the prosecution can lie
and conceal and the prisoner still has the burden to . . . discover the
evidence," Tr. of Oral Arg. 35, so long as the "potential existence" of a
prosecutorial misconduct claim might have been detected, _id.,_ at 36. A rule
thus declaring "prosecutor may hide, defendant must seek," is not tenable in a
system constitutionally bound to accord defendants due process. "Ordinarily,
we presume that public officials have properly discharged their official
duties." _Bracy_ v. _Gramley,_ 520 U.S. 899, 909 (1997) (quoting _United
States_ v. _Chemical Foundation, Inc.,_ 272 U.S. 1, 14-15 (1926) (internal
quotation marks omitted)). We have several times underscored the "special role
played by the American prosecutor in the search for truth in criminal trials."
_Strickler,_ 527 U. S., at 281; accord, _Kyles,_ 514 U. S., at 439-440;
_United States_ v. _Bagley,_ 473 U.S. 667, 675, n. 6 (1985); _Berger,_ 295 U.
S., at 88. See also _Olmstead_ v. _United States,_ 277 U.S. 438, 484 (1928)
(Brandeis, J., dissenting). Courts, litigants, and juries properly anticipate
that "obligations [to refrain from improper methods to secure a conviction] .
. . plainly rest[ing] upon the prosecuting attorney, will be faithfully
observed." _Berger,_ 295 U. S., at 88. Prosecutors' dishonest conduct or
unwarranted concealment should attract no judicial approbation. See _Kyles,_
514 U. S., at 440 ("The prudence of the careful prosecutor should not . . . be
discouraged.").

The State's second argument is a variant of the first. Specifically, the State
argues, and the Court of Appeals accepted, that Banks cannot show cause
because in the 1992 state-court postconviction proceedings, he failed to move
for investigative assistance enabling him to inquire into Farr's *697 police
connections, connections he then alleged, but failed to prove. Brief for
Respondent 15-16; App. to Pet. for Cert. A19; see 1977 Tex. Gen. Laws ch. 789,
§ 2(d) (as amended) (instructing postconviction court to "designat[e] the
issues of fact to be resolved," and giving the court discretion to "order
affidavits, depositions, interrogatories, and hearings"). Armed in 1992 only
with Demetra Jefferson's declaration that Farr was "well-connected to law
enforcement people," App. 195, ¶ 7; see _supra,_ at 682, Banks had little to
proffer in support of a request for assistance from the state postconviction
court. We assign no overriding significance to Banks's failure to invoke
state-court assistance to which he had no clear entitlement. Cf. _Strickler,_
527 U. S., at 286 ("Proper respect for state procedures counsels against a
requirement that all possible claims be raised in state collateral
proceedings, even when no known facts support them.").[16]

Finally, relying on _Roviaro_ v. _United States,_ 353 U.S. 53 (1957), the
State asserts that "disclosure [of an informant's identity] is not automatic,"
and, "[c]onsequently, it was Banks's duty to move for disclosure of otherwise
privileged material." Brief for Respondent 17-18, n. 15. We need not linger
over this argument. The issue of evidentiary law in _Roviaro_ was whether (or
when) the Government is obliged to reveal the identity of an undercover
informer the Government does _not_ call as a trial witness. 353 U.S., at
55-56. The Court there stated that no privilege obtains "[w]here the
disclosure of an informer's identity, or of the contents of his communication,
is relevant and helpful to the defense of an accused." _Id.,_ at 60-61.
Accordingly, even though the informer in _Roviaro_ did not testify, we held
that disclosure *698 of his identity was necessary because he could have
"amplif[ied] or contradict[ed] the testimony of government witnesses." _Id.,_
at 64.

Here, the State elected to call Farr as a witness. Indeed, he was a key
witness at both guilt and punishment phases of Banks's capital trial. Farr's
status as a paid informant was unquestionably "relevant"; similarly beyond
doubt, disclosure of Farr's status would have been "helpful to [Banks's]
defense." _Id.,_ at 60-61. Nothing in _Roviaro,_ or any other decision of this
Court, suggests that the State can examine an informant at trial, withholding
acknowledgment of his informant status in the hope that defendant will not
catch on, so will make no disclosure motion.

In summary, Banks's prosecutors represented at trial and in state
postconviction proceedings that the State had held nothing back. Moreover, in
state postconviction court, the State's pleading denied that Farr was an
informant. App. 234; _supra,_ at 683. It was not incumbent on Banks to prove
these representations false; rather, Banks was entitled to treat the
prosecutor's submissions as truthful. Accordingly, Banks has shown cause for
failing to present evidence in state court capable of substantiating his Farr
_Brady_ claim.

## C

Unless suppressed evidence is "material for _Brady_ purposes, [its]
suppression [does] not give rise to sufficient prejudice to overcome [a]
procedural default." _Strickler,_ 527 U. S., at 282 (internal quotation marks
omitted). Our touchstone on materiality is _Kyles_ v. _Whitley,_ 514 U.S. 419
(1995). _Kyles_ instructed that the materiality standard for _Brady_ claims is
met when "the favorable evidence could reasonably be taken to put the whole
case in such a different light as to undermine confidence in the verdict." 514
U.S., at 435. See also _id.,_ at 434-435 ("A defendant need not demonstrate
that after discounting the inculpatory evidence in light of the undisclosed
evidence, there would not have been enough left *699 to convict."); accord,
_Strickler,_ 527 U. S., at 290. In short, Banks must show a "reasonable
probability of a different result." _Kyles,_ 514 U. S., at 434 (internal
quotation marks omitted) (citing _Bagley,_ 473 U. S., at 678).

As the State acknowledged at oral argument, Farr was "paid for a critical role
in the scenario that led to the indictment." Tr. of Oral Arg. 34. Farr's
declaration, presented to the federal habeas court, asserts that Farr, not
Banks, initiated the proposal to obtain a gun to facilitate the commission of
robberies. See App. 442-443, ¶¶ 7-8; _supra,_ at 678. Had Farr not instigated,
upon Deputy Sheriff Huff's request, the Dallas excursion to fetch Banks's gun,
the prosecution would have had slim, if any, evidence that Banks planned to
"continue" committing violent acts. App. 147.[17] Farr's admission of his
instigating role, moreover, would have dampened the prosecution's zeal in
urging the jury to bear in mind Banks's "planning and acquisition of a gun to
commit robbery," or Banks's "planned violence." _Ibid.;_ see Tr. of Oral Arg.
50.[18]

*700 Because Banks had no criminal record, Farr's testimony about Banks's propensity to commit violent acts was crucial to the prosecution. Without that testimony, the State could not have underscored, as it did three times in the penalty phase, that Banks would use the gun fetched in Dallas to "take care" of trouble arising during the robberies. App. 140, 144, 146-147; see _supra,_ at 681. The stress placed by the prosecution on this part of Farr's testimony, uncorroborated by any other witness, belies the State's suggestion that "Farr's testimony was adequately corroborated." Brief for Respondent 22-25. The prosecution's penalty-phase summation, moreover, left no doubt about the importance the State attached to Farr's testimony. What Farr told the jury, the prosecution urged, was "of the utmost significance" to show "[Banks] is a danger to friends and strangers, alike." App. 146.

In _Strickler,_ 527 U. S., at 289, although the Court found "cause" for the
petitioner's procedural default of a _Brady_ claim, it found the requisite
"prejudice" absent, 527 U.S., at 292-296. Regarding "prejudice," the contrast
between _Strickler_ and Banks's case is marked. The witness whose impeachment
was at issue in _Strickler_ gave testimony that was in the main cumulative,
_id.,_ at 292, and hardly significant *701 to one of the "two predicates for
capital murder: [armed] robbery," _id.,_ at 294. Other evidence in the record,
the Court found, provided strong support for the conviction even if the
witness' testimony had been excluded entirely: Unlike the Banks prosecution,
in _Strickler,_ "considerable forensic and other physical evidence link[ed]
[the defendant] to the crime" and supported the capital murder conviction.
_Id.,_ at 293. Most tellingly, the witness' testimony in _Strickler_ "did not
relate to [the petitioner's] eligibility for the death sentence"; it "was not
relied upon by the prosecution at all during its closing argument at the
penalty phase." _Id.,_ at 295. In contrast, Farr's testimony was the
centerpiece of Banks's prosecution's penalty-phase case.

Farr's trial testimony, critical at the penalty phase, was cast in large doubt
by the declaration Banks ultimately obtained from Farr and introduced in the
federal habeas proceeding. See _supra,_ at 678, 684. In the guilt phase of
Banks's trial, Farr had acknowledged his narcotics use. App. 36. In the
penalty phase, Banks's counsel asked Farr if, "drawn up tight over" previous
drug-related activity, he would "testify to anything anybody want[ed] to
hear"; Farr denied this. _Id.,_ at 110; _supra,_ at 680. Farr's declaration
supporting Banks's federal habeas petition, however, vividly contradicts that
denial: "I assumed that if I did not help [Huff] . . . he would have me
arrested for drug charges." App. 442, ¶ 6. Had jurors known of Farr's
continuing interest in obtaining Deputy Sheriff Huff's favor, in addition to
his receipt of funds to "set [Banks] up," _id.,_ at 442, ¶ 7, they might well
have distrusted Farr's testimony, and, insofar as it was uncorroborated,
disregarded it.

The jury, moreover, did not benefit from customary, truth-promoting
precautions that generally accompany the testimony of informants. This Court
has long recognized the "serious questions of credibility" informers pose. _On
Lee_ v. _United States,_ 343 U.S. 747, 757 (1952). See also Trott, Words of
Warning for Prosecutors Using Criminals as Witnesses, *702 47 Hastings L. J.
1381, 1385 (1996) ("Jurors suspect [informants'] motives from the moment they
hear about them in a case, and they frequently disregard their testimony
altogether as highly untrustworthy and unreliable. . . ."). We have therefore
allowed defendants "broad latitude to probe [informants'] credibility by
cross-examination" and have counseled submission of the credibility issue to
the jury "with careful instructions." _On Lee,_ 343 U. S., at 757; accord,
_Hoffa_ v. _United States,_ 385 U.S. 293, 311-312 (1966). See also 1A K.
O'Malley, J. Grenig, & W. Lee, Federal Jury Practice and Instructions,
Criminal § 15.02 (5th ed. 2000) (jury instructions from the First, Fifth,
Sixth, Seventh, Eighth, Ninth, and Eleventh Circuits on special caution
appropriate in assessing informant testimony).

The State argues that "Farr was heavily impeached [at trial]," rendering his
informant status "merely cumulative." Tr. of Oral Arg. 49; see Brief for
Respondent 26-28; _post,_ at 709, n. 3. The record suggests otherwise. Neither
witness called to impeach Farr gave evidence directly relevant to Farr's part
in Banks's trial. App. 124-133; _id.,_ at 129 (prosecutor noted that Kelley
lacked "personal knowledge with regard to this case on trial"). The impeaching
witnesses, Kelley and Owen, moreover, were themselves impeached, as the
prosecution stressed on summation. See _id.,_ at 141, 148; _supra,_ at 680,
682. Further, the prosecution turned to its advantage remaining impeachment
evidence concerning Farr's drug use. On summation, the prosecution suggested
that Farr's admission "that he used dope, that he shot," demonstrated that
Farr had been "open and honest with [the jury] in every way." App. 140;
_supra,_ at 681.

At least as to the penalty phase, in sum, one can hardly be confident that
Banks received a fair trial, given the jury's ignorance of Farr's true role in
the investigation and trial of the case. See _Kyles,_ 514 U. S., at 434 ("The
question is not whether the defendant would more likely than not have received
a different verdict with the evidence, but whether in *703 its absence he
received a fair trial, understood as a trial resulting in a verdict worthy of
confidence."). On the record before us, one could not plausibly deny the
existence of the requisite "reasonable probability of a different result" had
the suppressed information been disclosed to the defense. _Ibid._ (internal
quotation marks omitted) (citing _Bagley,_ 473 U. S., at 678); _Strickler,_
527 U. S., at 290. Accordingly, as to the suppression of Farr's informant
status and its bearing on "the reliability of the jury's verdict regarding
punishment," App. to Pet. for Cert. C44; _supra,_ at 686, all three elements
of a _Brady_ claim are satisfied.

## III

Both the District Court and the Court of Appeals denied Banks a certificate of
appealability with regard to his Cook _Brady_ claim, which rested on the
prosecution's suppression of the September 1980 Cook interrogation transcript.
App. 422-423; App. to Pet. for Cert. A52, A78; _supra,_ at 687, 689. See also
Joint Lodging Material 1-36. The District Court and the Fifth Circuit
concluded that Banks had not properly pleaded this claim because he had not
sought leave to amend his petition, but had stated the claim only in other
submissions, _i. e.,_ in his proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law,
and, again, in his objections to the Magistrate Judge's report. App. 422-423,
432-433; App. to Pet. for Cert. A51-A52; _supra,_ at 687, 689. Banks
contended, unsuccessfully, that evidence substantiating the Cook _Brady_ claim
had been aired before the Magistrate Judge; therefore the claim should have
been treated as if raised in the pleadings, as Federal Rule of Civil Procedure
15(b) instructs. See App. to Pet. for Cert. A51-A52; _supra,_ at 687, n. 8
(setting out text of Rule 15(b)). The Fifth Circuit stated its position on
this point somewhat obliquely, but appears to have viewed Rule 15(b) as
inapplicable in habeas proceedings; the State now concedes, however, that the
question whether Rule 15(b) extends to habeas proceedings is one "jurists of
reason would *704 find . . . debatable." Compare App. to Pet. for Cert. A52
(quoting _Slack_ v. _McDaniel,_ 529 U.S. 473, 484 (2000)), with Tr. of Oral
Arg. 45-46. We conclude that a certificate of appealability should have
issued.

We have twice before referenced Rule 15(b)'s application in federal habeas
proceedings. In _Harris_ v. _Nelson,_ 394 U.S. 286, 294, n. 5 (1969), we noted
that Rule 15(b)'s use in habeas proceedings is "noncontroversial." In
_Withrow_ v. _Williams,_ 507 U.S. 680, 696, and n. 7 (1993), we similarly
assumed Rule 15(b)'s application to habeas petitions. There, however, the
District Court had granted a writ of habeas corpus on a claim neither pleaded,
considered at "an evidentiary hearing," nor "even argu[ed]" by the parties.
_Id.,_ at 695. Given those circumstances, we held that there had been no trial
of the claim by implied consent; the respondent warden, we observed, "was
manifestly prejudiced by the District Court's failure to afford her an
opportunity to present evidence bearing on th[e] claim's resolution." _Id.,_
at 696. Here, in contrast, the issue of the undisclosed Cook interrogation
transcript was indeed aired before the Magistrate Judge and the transcript
itself was admitted into evidence without objection. See _supra,_ at 685.[19]

The Court of Appeals found no authority for equating "an evidentiary hearing .
. . with a trial" for Rule 15(b) purposes. App. to Pet. for Cert. A52. We see
no reason why an evidentiary hearing should not qualify so long as the
respondent gave "any sort of consent" and had a full and fair "opportunity
*705 to present evidence bearing on th[e] claim's resolution." _Withrow,_ 507
U. S., at 696. Nor do we find convincing the Fifth Circuit's view that
applying Rule 15(b) in habeas proceedings would undermine the State's
exhaustion and procedural default defenses. _Ibid._ Under pre-AEDPA law, there
was no inconsistency between Rule 15(b) and those defenses. That is doubtless
why this Court's pre-AEDPA cases assumed Rule 15(b)'s application in habeas
proceedings. See _ibid.;__Harris,_ 394 U. S., at 294, n. 5.[20] We note in
this regard that, while AEDPA forbids a finding that exhaustion has been
waived unless the State expressly waives the requirement, 28 U.S. C. §
2254(b)(3), under pre-AEDPA law, exhaustion and procedural default defenses
could be waived based on the State's litigation conduct. See _Gray_ v.
_Netherland,_ 518 U.S. 152, 166 (1996) (failure to raise procedural default in
federal habeas court means the defense is lost); _Granberry_ v. _Greer,_ 481
U.S. 129, 135 (1987) ("if a full trial has been held in the district court and
it is evident that a miscarriage of justice has occurred, it may . . . be
appropriate for the court of appeals to hold that the nonexhaustion defense
has been waived").

To obtain a certificate of appealability, a prisoner must "demonstrat[e] that
jurists of reason could disagree with the district court's resolution of his
constitutional claims or that jurists could conclude the issues presented are
adequate to deserve encouragement to proceed further." _Miller-El_ v.
_Cockrell,_ 537 U.S. 322, 327 (2003). At least as to the application of Rule
15(b), this case surely fits that description. A certificate of appealability,
therefore, should have issued.

## * * *

For the reasons stated, the judgment of the United States Court of Appeals for
the Fifth Circuit is reversed, and the *706 case is remanded for further
proceedings consistent with this opinion.

_It is so ordered._

JUSTICE THOMAS, with whom JUSTICE SCALIA joins, concurring in part and
dissenting in part.

I join Part III of the Court's opinion, and respectfully dissent from Part II,
which holds that Banks' claim under _Brady_ v. _Maryland,_ 373 U.S. 83 (1963),
relating to the nondisclosure of evidence that Farr accepted money from a
police officer during the course of the investigation, warrants habeas relief.
Although I find it to be a very close question, I cannot conclude that the
nondisclosure of Farr's informant status was prejudicial under _Kyles_ v.
_Whitley,_ 514 U.S. 419 (1995), and _Brady._[1]

To demonstrate prejudice, Banks must show that "the favorable evidence could
reasonably be taken to put the whole case in such a different light as to
undermine confidence in the verdict." _Kyles, supra,_ at 435. The undisclosed
material consisted of evidence that "Willie Huff asked [Farr] to help him find
[Banks'] gun," and that Huff "gave [Farr] about $200.00 for helping him." App.
442 (Farr Declaration). Banks contends that if Farr's receipt of $200 from
Huff had been revealed to the defense, there would have been a "reasonable
probability," _Kyles, supra,_ at 434, that the jury would not have found
"beyond a reasonable doubt that there *707 [was] a probability that the
defendant, Delma Banks, Jr., would commit criminal acts of violence that would
constitute a continuing threat to society." App. 143 (the second special issue
presented to the jury) (internal quotation marks omitted).

I do not believe that there is a reasonable probability that the jury would
have altered its finding. The jury was presented with the facts of a horrible
crime. Banks, after meeting the victim, Richard Whitehead, a 16-year-old boy
who had the misfortune of owning a car that Banks wanted, decided "to kill the
person for the hell of it" and take his car. _Banks_ v. _State,_ 643 S.W.2d
129, 131 (Tex. Crim. App. 1982) (en banc), cert. denied, 464 U.S. 904 (1983).
Banks proceeded to shoot Whitehead three times, twice in the head and once in
the upper back. Banks fired one of the shots only 18 to 24 inches away from
Whitehead. The jury was thus presented with evidence showing that Banks,
apparently on a whim, executed Whitehead simply to get his car.

The jury was also presented with evidence, in the form of Banks' own
testimony, that he was willing to abet another individual in obtaining a gun,
with the full knowledge that this gun would aid future armed robberies. The
colloquy between a prosecuting attorney and Banks makes it clear what Banks
thought he was doing:

> "Q: You were going to supply him [Farr] your gun so he could do armed
> robberies?

> "A: No, not supply him my gun. A gun.

> "Q: In other words you didn't care if it was yours or whose, but you were
> going to be the man who got the gun to do armed robberies. Is that correct?

> "A: He was going to do it.

> "Q: I understand, but you were going to supply him the means and possible
> death weapon in an armed robbery case. Is that correct?

> "A: Yes." App. 137 (cross-examination of Banks).

*708 Accordingly, the jury was also presented with Banks' willingness to assist others in committing deadly crimes. Indeed, the prosecution referenced this very fact at one point during its closing argument in its attempt to convince the jury that Banks posed a threat to commit violent acts in the future:

> "The testimony of Vetrano Jefferson and Robert Farr is of the utmost
> significance. Vetrano brought before you the scar on his face, put there by
> Delma Banks. . . . He also corroborates or supports the testimony of Robert
> Farr. You don't have to believe just Robert in order to find that Delma went
> to Dallas to get a pistol so that _somebody could do some robberies._ Marcus
> Jefferson told you that, too." _Id.,_ at 146 (emphasis added).[2]

The jury also heard testimony that Banks had violently pistol-whipped and
threatened to kill his brother-in-law one week before the murder. Banks now
claims that this evidence should be discounted because his trial counsel
failed to uncover that the brother-in-law was "responsible for the fight."
Brief for Petitioner 33. But even if it is appropriate to mix-and-match the
prejudice analysis of the _Brady_ claim and the claim under _Strickland_ v.
_Washington,_ 466 U.S. 668 (1984) (rather than to evaluate them independently,
as distinct potential constitutional violations), Banks' response was vastly
disproportional to his brother-in-law's actions.

In sum, the jury knew that Banks had murdered a 16-year-old on a whim, had
violently attacked and threatened a relative shortly before the murder, and
was willing to assist another individual in committing armed robberies by
providing the "means and possible death weapon" for these robberies. App. 137.
Even if the jury were to discredit entirely *709 Farr's testimony that Banks
was planning more robberies,[3] in all likelihood the jury still would have
found "beyond a reasonable doubt" that there "[was] a probability that [Banks]
would commit criminal acts of violence that would constitute a continuing
threat to society." _Id.,_ at 143 (internal quotation marks omitted). The
randomness and wantonness of the murder would perhaps, standing alone, mandate
such a finding. Accordingly, I cannot find that the nondisclosure of the
evidence was prejudicial.

Because Banks cannot show prejudice, I do not resolve whether he has cause to
excuse his failure to present his Farr _Brady_ evidence in state court,
_Keeney_ v. _Tamayo-Reyes,_ 504 U.S. 1, 11-12 (1992). But there are reasons to
doubt the Court's conclusion that Banks can show cause. For instance, the
Court concludes that "[t]his case is congruent with _Strickler_ [v. _Greene,_
527 U.S. 263 (1999)]," _ante,_ at 693, relying in part on the State's general
denial of all of Banks' factual allegations contained in his January 1992
state habeas application. But, in the relevant state postconviction proceeding
in _Strickler,_ the State alleged that the petitioner had already received
"`_everything_ known to the government,'" a statement that federal habeas
proceedings established was clearly not true. 527 U.S., at 289 (emphasis
added). In the instant case, the particular allegation raised in Banks' state
habeas application and denied by the State was that "the *710 prosecution
_knowingly_ failed to turn over exculpatory evidence _as required by_ _Brady_
v. _Maryland,_ 373 U.S. 83 (1963)." App. 180 (emphasis added). The State,
then, could have been denying only that the prosecution _knowingly_ failed to
turn over the evidence (there is, incidentally, very little evidence in the
record tending to show that any prosecutor had actual knowledge of Huff's
payment to Farr). Or, the State could have been denying only that it had
failed to turn over evidence _in violation of_ Brady, _i. e.,_ that any
evidence the prosecution did not turn over was not material (a position
advanced by the State throughout the federal habeas process), see _Strickler,
supra,_ at 281 ("[S]trictly speaking, there is never a real `_Brady_
violation' unless the nondisclosure was so serious that there is a reasonable
probability that the suppressed evidence would have produced a different
verdict"). Either way, _Strickler_ does not clearly control, and the Court's
reliance on it is less than compelling.

Because of the Court's disposition of Banks' Farr _Brady_ claim, it does not
address his claim of ineffective assistance of counsel, concluding that "any
relief he could obtain on that claim would be cumulative." _Ante,_ at 689, n.
10. As I would affirm the Court of Appeals on the Farr _Brady_ claim, I
briefly discuss this ineffective-assistance claim. Although I find the Farr
_Brady_ claim a close call, I do not find this to be so as to the ineffective-
assistance claim. Banks comes nowhere close to satisfying the prejudice prong
of _Strickland_ v. _Washington, supra_ _._ The conclusory and uncorroborated
claims of some level of physical abuse, the allegations that a bad skin
condition negatively affected his childhood development, the evidence that he
was a slow learner and possessed a willingness to please others, and the claim
that Banks' brother-in-law was responsible for his own pistol-whipping and
receipt of a death threat, are so unpersuasive that there is no reasonable
probability that the jury would have come to the opposite conclusion with
respect to the future *711 dangerousness special issue, even if presented with
this evidence.

I therefore conclude that the Court of Appeals did not err when it denied
relief to Banks based on his Farr _Brady_ claim and his _Strickland_ claim. I
would reverse the Court of Appeals only insofar as it did not grant a
certificate of appealability on the Cook _Brady_ claim.

## NOTES

[*] Briefs of _amici curiae_ urging reversal were filed for William G.
Broaddus et al. by _William F. Sheehan;_ and for John J. Gibbons et al. by
_Peter Buscemi_ and _Brooke Clagett._

_A. P. Carlton, Jr., Lynn R. Coleman,_ and _Matthew W. S. Estes_ filed a brief
for the American Bar Association as _amicus curiae._

[1] Although a police officer testified Whitehead's body was found on April
14, App. 8, the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals stated the body was discovered
on April 15. _Banks_ v. _State,_ 643 S.W.2d 129, 131 (1982) (en banc).

[2] "A person commits an offense if he commits murder . . . and . . . the
person intentionally commits the murder in the course of committing or
attempting to commit kidnapping, burglary, robbery, aggravated rape, or
arson." Tex. Penal Code Ann. § 19.03(a)(2) (1974).

[3] As set forth in Texas law, the three special issues were:

"(1) whether the conduct of the defendant that caused the death of the
deceased was committed deliberately and with the reasonable expectation that
the death of the deceased or another would result;

"(2) whether there is a probability that the defendant would commit criminal
acts of violence that would constitute a continuing threat to society; and

"(3) if raised by the evidence, whether the conduct of the defendant in
killing the deceased was unreasonable in response to the provocation, if any,
by the deceased." Tex. Code Crim. Proc. Ann., Arts. 37.071(b)(1)-(3) (Vernon
Supp. 1980).

[4] Banks, in fact, had no criminal record at all. App. 255, ¶ 115; App. to
Pet. for Cert. C23. He also "had no history of violence or alcohol abuse and
seemed to possess a self-control that would suggest no particular risk of
future violence." _Ibid._

[5] _Brady_ v. _Maryland,_ 373 U.S. 83, 87 (1963), held that "the suppression
by the prosecution of evidence favorable to an accused upon request violates
due process where the evidence is material either to guilt or to punishment,
irrespective of the good faith or bad faith of the prosecution."

[6] Banks also alleged ineffective assistance of counsel at both the guilt and
penalty phases; insufficient evidence on the second penalty-phase special
issue (Banks's propensity to commit violent criminal acts); and the exclusion
of minority jurors in violation of _Swain_ v. _Alabama,_ 380 U.S. 202 (1965).
App. to Pet. for Cert. C5-C7. Banks filed two further state postconviction
motions; both were denied. Brief for Respondent 6-7, nn. 6 and 7 (citing _Ex
parte Banks,_ No. 13568-03 (Tex. Crim. App. 1993) _(per curiam),_ and _Ex
parte Banks,_ No. 13568-06 (Tex. Crim. App.), cert. denied, 538 U.S. 990
(2003)).

[7] We hereinafter refer to these claims as the Farr _Brady_ and Cook _Brady_
claims respectively. See _supra,_ at 682, n. 5.

[8] Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 15(b) provides: "When issues not raised by
the pleadings are tried by express or implied consent of the parties, they
shall be treated in all respects as if they had been raised in the pleadings.
Such amendment of the pleadings as may be necessary to cause them to conform
to the evidence and to raise these issues may be made upon motion of any party
at any time. . . ." Rule 11 of the Rules Governing Section 2254 Cases in the
United States District Courts provides that the Federal Rules of Civil
Procedure apply "to the extent that they are not inconsistent with [habeas]
rules."

[9] The Fifth Circuit noted correctly that under _Lindh_ v. _Murphy,_ 521 U.S.
320, 336-337 (1997), the standards of the Antiterrorism and Effective Death
Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA), 110 Stat. 1214, do not apply to Banks's petition.
See App. to Pet. for Cert. A14-A15.

[10] Our disposition of the Farr _Brady_ claim, and our conclusion that a writ
of habeas corpus should issue with respect to the death sentence, render it
unnecessary to address Banks's claim of ineffective assistance of counsel at
the penalty phase; any relief he could obtain on that claim would be
cumulative.

[11] Banks's federal habeas petition, the Court of Appeals said, stated a
claim, only under _Brady,_ that material exculpatory or impeachment evidence
had been suppressed, not a claim under _Napue_ v. _Illinois,_ 360 U.S. 264
(1959), and _Giglio_ v. _United States,_ 405 U.S. 150 (1972), that the
prosecution had failed to correct Farr's false testimony. App. to Pet. for
Cert. A29-A32; App. 259-260. In its view, the Court of Appeals explained, a
_Brady_ claim is distinct from a _Giglio_ claim, App. to Pet. for Cert. A30;
thus the two did not fit under one umbrella. But cf. _United States_ v.
_Bagley,_ 473 U.S. 667, 679-680, n. 8 (1985); _United States_ v. _Agurs,_ 427
U.S. 97, 103-104 (1976). On brief, the parties debate the issue. Brief for
Petitioner 23-25; Brief for Respondent 21-22, n. 21. Because we conclude that
Banks qualifies for relief under _Brady,_ we need not decide whether a
_Giglio_ claim, to warrant adjudication, must be separately pleaded.

[12] Surprisingly, the Court of Appeals' _per curiam_ opinion did not refer to
_Strickler_ v. _Greene,_ 527 U.S. 263 (1999), the controlling precedent on the
issue of "cause." App. to Pet. for Cert. A15-A33.

[13] We left open the question "whether any one or two of these factors would
be sufficient to constitute cause." _Strickler,_ 527 U. S., at 289. We need
not decide that question today.

[14] In addition, Banks could have expected disclosure of Farr's informant
status as a matter of state law if Farr in fact acted in that capacity. Under
Texas law applicable at the time of Banks's trial, the State had an obligation
to disclose the identity of an informant when "the informant . . . was present
at the time of the offense or arrest . . . [or] was otherwise shown to be a
material witness to the transaction. . . ." _Kemner_ v. _State,_ 589 S.W.2d
403, 408 (Tex. Crim. App. 1979) (quoting _Carmouche_ v. _State,_ 540 S.W.2d
701, 703 (Tex. Crim. App. 1976)); cf. Tex. Rule Evid. 508(c)(1) (2003) ("No
privilege exists [for the identity of an informer] . . . if the informer
appears as a witness for the public entity."). Farr was present when Banks was
arrested. App. 443, ¶ 10. Further, as the prosecution noted in its penalty-
phase summation, Farr's testimony was not only material, but "of the utmost
significance." _Id.,_ at 146.

[15] The Court of Appeals also stated that, because "the State did not
respond" to Banks's "Farr-was-an-informant contention" in its answer to the
January 1992 state habeas application, Banks should have "further
investigate[d]." App. to Pet. for Cert. A22. The Fifth Circuit's error in this
regard is apparent. As earlier recounted, see _supra,_ at 683, the State's
answer indeed did deny Banks's allegation.

[16] Furthermore, rather than conceding the need for factual development of
the Farr _Brady_ claim in state postconviction court, the State asserted that
Banks's prosecutorial misconduct claims were meritless and procedurally barred
in that tribunal. App. 234, 240. Having taken that position in 1992, the State
can hardly fault Banks now for failing earlier to request assistance the State
certainly would have opposed.

[17] It bears reiteration here that Banks had no criminal record, _id.,_ at
255, ¶ 115, "no history of violence or alcohol abuse," nothing indicative of
"[any] particular risk of future violence." App. to Pet. for Cert. C23.

It also appears that the remaining prosecution witness in the penalty phase,
Vetrano Jefferson, had omitted crucial details from his 1980 testimony. In his
September 1980 testimony, Vetrano Jefferson said that Banks had struck him
with a pistol in early April 1980. App. 104-105; _supra,_ at 679-680. In the
federal habeas proceeding, Vetrano Jefferson elaborated that he, not Banks,
had initiated that incident by making "disrespectful comments" about Demetra
Jefferson, Banks's girlfriend. App. 337, ¶ 4. Vetrano Jefferson recounted that
he "grew angry" when Banks objected to the comments, and only then did a fight
ensue, in the course of which Banks struck Vetrano Jefferson. _Ibid._

[18] On brief and at oral argument, the State suggests that "the damaging
evidence was Banks's willing abetment of Farr's commission of a violent crime,
_not_ Banks's own intent to commit such an act." Brief for Respondent 25
(emphasis in original); Tr. of Oral Arg. 50. See also _post,_ at 707-708
(THOMAS, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). In the penalty-phase
summation, however, the prosecution highlighted Banks's propensity to commit
violent criminal acts, see App. 140, 144, 146-147, not his facilitation of
others' criminal acts, see _id.,_ at 141 ("[Banks] says, `I thought I would
give [the gun] to them so they could do the robberies.' I don't believe you
[the jury] believe that."); _id.,_ at 143 ("a man doesn't travel two hundred
miles . . . to supply [another] person with a weapon"). The special issue the
prosecution addressed focused on what acts Banks would commit, not what harms
he might facilitate: "Do you find from the evidence beyond a reasonable doubt
that there is a probability that the defendant, Delma Banks, Jr., would
_commit_ criminal acts of violence that would constitute a continuing threat
to society?" _Ibid._ (internal quotation marks omitted and emphasis added). It
is therefore unsurprising that the prosecution did not rest on Banks's
facilitation of others' criminal acts in urging the jury to answer the second
special issue (propensity to commit violent criminal acts) in the affirmative.

[19] See Federal Evidentiary Hearing 56-73. Examining one of Banks's
prosecutors, counsel for Banks twice asked if Cook had been "instructed. . .
on how to testify." _Id.,_ at 56. See also _id.,_ at 63-64 ("Texarkana law
enforcement did not instruct Mr. Cook how to testify in this case. Is that
your testimony today?"). To show that Cook had been coached, Banks's counsel
called attention to discrepancies between portions of the September 1980
transcript and Cook's trial testimony. _Id.,_ at 65-68. Concluding his
examination, Banks's counsel emphasized the prosecution's duty to disclose the
September 1980 transcript once Cook, while on the stand, stated that he had
not been coached. _Id.,_ at 73-74; App. 59; _supra,_ at 677.

[20] Banks's case provides no occasion to consider Rule 15(b)'s application
under the AEDPA regime.

[1] I do not address the possible application of the standard enunciated in
_Giglio_ v. _United States,_ 405 U.S. 150 (1972), since I agree with the Court
of Appeals that the issue was not properly raised below, and since addressing
this issue would go beyond the question on which certiorari was granted. See
Brief for Petitioner (i) (stating the question presented as whether "the Fifth
Circuit commit[ted] legal error in rejecting Banks' _Brady_ claim  that the
prosecution suppressed material witness impeachment evidence that prejudiced
him in the penalty phase of his trial  on the grounds that: . . . the
suppressed evidence was immaterial to Banks' death sentence").

[2] Admittedly, the prosecution used more of its closing argument trying to
convince the jury to believe Farr's testimony that Banks himself was planning
more robberies. See _ante,_ at 699-700, n. 18. This fact is one of the reasons
I find the materiality question to be a close one.

[3] It is quite possible that the jury already discredited this aspect of
Farr's testimony. The jury knew, from the testimony of witnesses James Kelley
and Officer Gary Owen, that Farr was generally dishonest, as it heard how he
had lied about getting into an altercation with a doctor over false
prescriptions, and had lied about his status as an informant for an Arkansas
officer in other cases. The Court suggests that the witnesses providing this
information were themselves "impeached." _Ante,_ at 702. At best, though, they
were only slightly impeached. The prosecution merely intimated that Owen was
slanting his testimony in the hopes of being hired by the defense counsel's
private investigator, App. 131, and that Kelley was doing the same as he was a
"friend of [Banks'] family," _id.,_ at 141.

