**360 U.S. 264 (1959)**

# NAPUE  
v.  
ILLINOIS.

No. 583.

**Supreme Court of United States.**

Argued April 30, 1959. Decided June 15, 1959. CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT
OF ILLINOIS.

_George N. Leighton_ argued the cause and filed a brief for petitioner.

_William C. Wines,_ Assistant Attorney General of Illinois, argued the cause
for respondent. With him on the brief were _Latham Castle,_ Attorney General
of Illinois, _Raymond S. Sarnow_ and _A. Zola Graves,_ Assistant Attorneys
General.

*265 MR. CHIEF JUSTICE WARREN delivered the opinion of the Court.

At the murder trial of petitioner the principal state witness, then serving a
199-year sentence for the same murder, testified in response to a question by
the Assistant State's Attorney that he had received no promise of
consideration in return for his testimony. The Assistant State's Attorney had
in fact promised him consideration, but did nothing to correct the witness'
false testimony. The jury was apprised, however, that a public defender had
promised "to do what he could" for the witness. The question presented is
whether on these facts the failure of the prosecutor to correct the testimony
of the witness which he knew to be false denied petitioner due process of law
in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United
States.

The record in this Court contains testimony from which the following facts
could have been found. The murder in question occurred early in the morning of
August 21, 1938, in a Chicago, Illinois, cocktail lounge. Petitioner Henry
Napue, the witness George Hamer, one Poe and one Townsend entered the dimly
lighted lounge and announced their intention to rob those present. An off-duty
policeman, present in the lounge, drew his service revolver and began firing
at the four men. In the melee that followed Townsend was killed, the officer
was fatally wounded, and the witness Hamer was seriously wounded. Napue and
Poe carried Hamer to the car where a fifth man, one Webb, was waiting. In due
course Hamer was apprehended, tried for the murder of the policeman, convicted
on his plea of guilty and sentenced to 199 years. Subsequently, Poe was
apprehended, tried, convicted, sentenced to death and executed. Hamer was not
used as a witness.

Thereafter, petitioner Napue was apprehended. He was put on trial with Hamer
being the principal witness *266 for the State. Hamer's testimony was
extremely important because the passage of time and the dim light in the
cocktail lounge made eyewitness identification very difficult and uncertain,
and because some pertinent witnesses had left the state. On the basis of the
evidence presented, which consisted largely of Hamer's testimony, the jury
returned a guilty verdict and petitioner was sentenced to 199 years.

Finally, the driver of the car, Webb, was apprehended. Hamer also testified
against him. He was convicted of murder and sentenced to 199 years.

Following the conviction of Webb, the lawyer who, as former Assistant State's
Attorney, had prosecuted the Hamer, Poe and Napue cases filed a petition in
the nature of a writ of error _coram nobis_ on behalf of Hamer. In the
petition he alleged that as prosecuting attorney he had promised Hamer that if
he would testify against Napue, "a recommendation for a reduction of his
[Hamer's] sentence would be made and, if possible, effectuated."[1] The *267
attorney prayed that the court would effect "consummation of the compact
entered into between the duly authorized representatives of the State of
Illinois and George Hamer."

This _coram nobis_ proceeding came to the attention of Napue, who thereafter
filed a post-conviction petition, in which he alleged that Hamer had falsely
testified that he had been promised no consideration for his testimony,[2] and
that the Assistant State's Attorney handling the case had known this to be
false. A hearing was ultimately held at which the former Assistant State's
Attorney testified that he had only promised to help Hamer if Hamer's story
"about being a reluctant participant" in the robbery was borne out, and not
merely if Hamer would testify at petitioner's trial. He testified that in his
_coram nobis_ petition on Hamer's behalf he "probably used some language that
[he] should not have used" in his "zeal to do something for Hamer" to whom he
"felt a moral obligation." The lower court denied petitioner relief on the
basis of the attorney's testimony.

On appeal, the Illinois Supreme Court affirmed on different grounds over two
dissents. 13 Ill. 2d 566, 150 N.E.2d 613. It found, contrary to the trial
court, that the attorney had promised Hamer consideration if he would testify
at petitioner's trial, a finding which the State does not contest here. It
further found that the Assistant State's Attorney knew that Hamer had lied in
denying that *268 he had been promised consideration. It held, however that
petitioner was entitled to no relief since the jury had already been apprised
that someone whom Hamer had tentatively identified as being a public defender
"was going to do what he could" in aid of Hamer, and "was trying to get
something did" for him.[3] We granted certiorari *269 to consider the question
posed in the first paragraph of this opinion. 358 U.S. 919.

_First,_ it is established that a conviction obtained through use of false
evidence, known to be such by representatives of the State, must fall under
the Fourteenth Amendment, _Mooney_ v. _Holohan,_ 294 U.S. 103; _Pyle_ v.
_Kansas,_ 317 U.S. 213; _Curran_ v. _Delaware,_ 259 F.2d 707. See _New York ex
rel. Whitman_ v. _Wilson,_ 318 U.S. 688, and _White_ v. _Ragen,_ 324 U.S. 760.
Compare _Jones_ v. _Commonwealth,_ 97 F.2d 335, 338, with _In re Sawyer's
Petition,_ 229 F.2d 805, 809. Cf. _Mesarosh_ v. _United States,_ 352 U.S. 1.
The same result obtains when the State, although not soliciting false
evidence, allows it to go uncorrected when it appears. _Alcorta_ v. _Texas,_
355 U.S. 28; _United States ex rel. Thompson_ v. _Dye,_ 221 F.2d 763; _United
States ex rel. Almeida_ v. _Baldi,_ 195 F.2d 815; _United States ex rel.
Montgomery_ v. _Ragen,_ 86 F. Supp. 382. See generally annotation, 2 L. Ed. 2d
1575.

The principle that a State may not knowingly use false evidence, including
false testimony, to obtain a tainted conviction, implicit in any concept of
ordered liberty, does not cease to apply merely because the false testimony
goes only to the credibility of the witness. The jury's estimate of the
truthfulness and reliability of a given witness may well be determinative of
guilt or innocence, and it is upon such subtle factors as the possible
interest of the witness in testifying falsely that a defendant's life or
liberty may depend. As stated by the New York Court of Appeals in a case very
similar to this one, _People_ v. _Savvides,_ 1 N.Y. 2d 554, 557; 136 N.E.2d
853, 854-855; 154 N. Y. S. 2d 885, 887:

> "It is of no consequence that the falsehood bore upon the witness'
> credibility rather than directly upon defendant's guilt. A lie is a lie, no
> matter *270 what its subject, and, if it is in any way relevant to the case,
> the district attorney has the responsibility and duty to correct what he
> knows to be false and elicit the truth. . . . That the district attorney's
> silence was not the result of guile or a desire to prejudice matters little,
> for its impact was the same, preventing, as it did, a trial that could in
> any real sense be termed fair."

_Second,_ we do not believe that the fact that the jury was apprised of other
grounds for believing that the witness Hamer may have had an interest in
testifying against petitioner turned what was otherwise a tainted trial into a
fair one. As Mr. Justice Schaefer, joined by Chief Justice Davis, rightly put
it in his dissenting opinion below, 13 Ill. 2d 566, 571, 150 N.E.2d 613, 616:

> "What is overlooked here is that Hamer clearly testified that no one had
> offered to help him except an unidentified lawyer from the public defender's
> office."

Had the jury been apprised of the true facts, however, it might well have
concluded that Hamer had fabricated testimony in order to curry the favor of
the very representative of the State who was prosecuting the case in which
Hamer was testifying, for Hamer might have believed that such a representative
was in a position to implement (as he ultimately attempted to do) any promise
of consideration. That the Assistant State's Attorney himself thought it
important to establish before the jury that no official source had promised
Hamer consideration is made clear by his redirect examination, which was the
last testimony of Hamer's heard by the jury:

> "Q. Mr. Hamer, has Judge Prystalski [the trial judge] promised you any
> reduction of sentence?

> *271 "A. No, sir.

> "Q. Have I promised you that I would recommend any reduction of sentence to
> anybody?

> "A. You did not. [That answer was false and known to be so by the
> prosecutor.]

> "Q. Has any Judge of the criminal court promised that they [_sic_] would
> reduce your sentence?

> "A. No, sir.

> "Q. Has any representative of the Parole Board been to see you and promised
> you a reduction of sentence?

> "A. No, sir.

> "Q. Has any representative of the Governor of the State of Illinois promised
> you a reduction of sentence?

> "A. No, sir."

We are therefore unable to agree with the Illinois Supreme Court that "there
was no constitutional infirmity by virtue of the false statement."

_Third,_ the State argues that we are not free to reach a factual conclusion
different from that reached by the Illinois Supreme Court, and that we are
bound by its determination that the false testimony could not in any
reasonable likelihood have affected the judgment of the jury. The State relies
on _Hysler_ v. _Florida,_ 315 U.S. 411. But in that case the Court held only
that a state standard of specificity and substantiality in making allegations
of federal constitutional deprivations would be respected, and this Court made
its own "independent examination" of the allegations there to determine if
they had in fact met the Florida standard. The duty of this Court to make its
own independent examination of the record when federal constitutional
deprivations are alleged is clear, resting, as it does, on our solemn
responsibility for maintaining the Constitution inviolate. _Martin_ v.
_Hunter's Lessee,_ 1 Wheat. 304; _Cooper_ v. _Aaron,_ 358 U.S. 1. *272 This
principle was well stated in _Niemotko_ v. _Maryland,_ 340 U.S. 268, 271:

> "In cases in which there is a claim of denial of rights under the Federal
> Constitution, this Court is not bound by the conclusions of lower courts,
> but will reexamine the evidentiary basis on which those conclusions are
> founded."

It is now so well settled that the Court was able to speak in _Kern-Limerick,
Inc.,_ v. _Scurlock,_ 347 U.S. 110, 121, of the "long course of judicial
construction which establishes as a principle that the duty rests on this
Court to decide for itself facts or constructions upon which federal
constitutional issues rest."[4] As previously indicated, our own evaluation of
the record here compels us to hold that the false testimony used by the State
in securing the conviction of petitioner may have had an effect on the outcome
of the trial. Accordingly, the judgment below must be

_Reversed._

## NOTES

[1] In relevant part, his petition read as follows:

"After Hamer was sentenced your petitioner [the Assistant State's Attorney]
well knowing that identification of Poe, Napue and Webb if and when
apprehended would be of an unsatisfactory character and not the kind of
evidence upon which a jury could be asked to inflict a proper, severe penalty,
and being unable to determine in advance whether Poe, Napue and Webb would
make confessions of their participation in the crime, represented to Hamer
that if he would be willing to cooperate with law enforcing officials upon the
trial of [_sic_] trials of Poe, Napue and Webb when they were apprehended,
that a recommendation for a reduction of his sentence would be made and, if
possible, effectuated.

.....

"Before testifying on behalf of the State and against Napue, Hamer expressed
to your petitioner a reluctance to cooperate any further unless he were given
definite assurance that a recommendation for reduction of his sentence would
be made. Your petitioner, feeling that the interests of justice required
Hamer's testimony, again assured Hamer that every possible effort would be
made to conform to the promise previously made to him."

[2] The alleged false testimony of Hamer first occurred on his cross-
examination:

"Q. Did anybody give you a reward or promise you a reward for testifying?

"A. There ain't nobody promised me anything."

On redirect examination the Assistant State's Attorney again elicited the same
false answer.

"Q. [by the Assistant State's Attorney] Have I promised you that I would
recommend any reduction of sentence to anybody?

"A. You did not."

[3] The following is Hamer's testimony on the subject:

"Q. [on cross-examination] And didn't you tell him [one of Napue's attorneys]
that you wouldn't testify in this case unless you got some consideration for
it?

"A. . . . Yes, I did; I told him that.

.....

"Q. What are you sentenced for?

"A. One Hundred and Ninety-Nine Years.

"Q. You hope to have that reduced, don't you?

"A. Well, if anybody would help me or do anything for me, why certainly I
would.

"Q. Weren't you expecting that when you came here today?

"A. There haven't no one told me anything, no more than the lawyer. The lawyer
come in and talked to me a while ago and said he was going to do what he
could.

"Q. Which lawyer was that?

"A. I don't know; it was a Public Defender. I don't see him in here.

"Q. You mean he was from the Public Defender's office?

"A. I imagine that is where he was from, I don't know.

"Q. And he was the one who told you that?

"A. Yes, he told me he was trying to get something did for me.

"Q. . . . And he told you he was going to do something for you?

"A. He said he was going to try to.

.....

"Q. And you told them [police officers] you would [testify at the trial of
Napue] but you expected some consideration for it?

"A. I asked them was there any chance of me getting any. The man told me he
didn't know, that he couldn't promise me anything.

"Q. Then you spoke to a lawyer today who said he would try to get your time
cut?

"A. That was this Public Defender. I don't even know his name. . . ."

[4] See, _e. g.,__Payne_ v. _Arkansas,_ 356 U.S. 560, 562; _Leyra_ v. _Denno,_
347 U.S. 556, 558; _Avery_ v. _Georgia,_ 345 U.S. 559, 561; _Feiner_ v. _New
York,_ 340 U.S. 315, 322, 323, note 4 (dissenting opinion); _Cassell_ v.
_Texas,_ 339 U.S. 282, 283; _Haley_ v. _Ohio,_ 332 U.S. 596, 599; _Malinski_
v. _New York,_ 324 U.S. 401, 404; _Ashcraft_ v. _Tennessee,_ 322 U.S. 143,
149; _Ward_ v. _Texas,_ 316 U.S. 547, 550; _Smith_ v. _Texas,_ 311 U.S. 128,
130; _South Carolina_ v. _Bailey,_ 289 U.S. 412, 420. See also, _e. g.,__Roth_
v. _United States,_ 354 U.S. 476, 497 (dissenting opinion); _Stroble_ v.
_California,_ 343 U.S. 181, 190; _Sterling_ v. _Constantin,_ 287 U.S. 378,
398; _Southern Pacific Co._ v. _Schuyler,_ 227 U.S. 601, 611; _Creswill_ v.
_Grand Lodge Knights of Pythias,_ 225 U.S. 246, 261.

Mr. Justice Holmes, writing for the Court, recognized the principle over 35
years ago in _Davis_ v. _Wechsler,_ 263 U.S. 22, 24:

"If the Constitution and laws of the United States are to be enforced, this
Court cannot accept as final the decision of a state tribunal as to what are
the facts alleged to give rise to the right or to bar the assertion of it even
upon local grounds."

